---
title: "Emotional life of dogs"
date: "2022-10-15"
image: "emotions.jpg"
excerpt: "Emotional life of dogs"
isFeatured: true
---

# Emotional life of dogs

**Dogs** have a very rich emotional life, just as humans can feel joy, anger, disgust or fear. The most of the behavioural challenges with dogs is connected to their emotional life.\
Biting and destroying objects, pulling on a leash, escaping during walks, separation anxiety, aggression against other dogs and people, getting dirty at home, are some of such problems. Their cause is most often ignorance of the rules governing the dog psyche, and thus sending the dog inappropriate or contradictory messages.\
Fear of the unknown is natural. Unconditional courage would not allow animals to survive in the natural environment. Dogs, like humans, have different characters. Some are brave and few situations stress them, while others might rather avoid new or different situation.
In the face of a stressful situation, the dog can choose from 4 behaviours, also named **“Four Fs of Fear”**: freeze (stand still),
flight (run away),
flirt (the most easily interpreted behaviour, dog runs around or play, but indeed this is displacement behaviour coming from the place of deep fear)
and fight (attack).\
There are many causes of anxiety and the severe effects of unworked trauma. One of my own dogs, came from the shelter in age of 9 months. She spent there all her life since she was only 2 weeks old. The very first root of her extreme fear was the fact, that she was taken from her mom before she was 2 weeks old. Taking a puppy from his mother, when he is less than 8 weeks old, can very negatively affect his subsequent emotional development, because next to the mother puppy is learning social behaviours, creating trust bond and getting proper nutrition. A sense of security that develops next to the mother protects puppies from the disastrous effect of stress hormones on their nervous system. The stress felt by the dog at such a young age leaves behind permanent traces in the brain and makes the quadruped feel it more strongly even as an adult. Taking the puppy too early from the mother can also decreased self-confidence. Studies have shown that dogs staying in a puppy's age under the caring care of their mother are more open to meeting new people and objects. Without contact with the and siblings, dogs were more likely to show anxiety reactions in everyday situations. The second root of Mitzi’s fear was missed socialisation window. In the shelter she had very limited possibilities to get to know new objects, she has never been exposed to new stimuli and inputs. \
It all together meant that when she came to Germany at the age of 9 months, Mitzi was scared of everything around her. However, the big plus was the fact that she trusted us from the very beginning and was never afraid of people. On the contrary, she always reacted with joy to people on the street or to our guests. \
Whether the fears are acquired or innate, it is the role of the dog carrier to help dealing with them. The feeling of constant fear causes frustration in the dog, then it can lead to behaviours such as aggression towards the stress factor, biting objects, urinating at home or even phobias. In my opinion, in the healing process, very important is the approach of the dog caregivers. The very first step towards healing of Mitzi was the acceptance of her behaviour and commitment to work hard and patiently do improve it. I knew, that some of her fears we might be able to work through, but others, despite the training might still be there. It was for me very important, that she feels, that we accept her and give her safe space. \
The very first issue that I have noticed was her interactions with other dogs on the dog runs. She was constantly bullied, sometimes withdrawn, rather watching other dogs than play. When approach for 1 on 1 play, she would be very happy and playful. We decided to put Mitzi through the dog’s kindergarten, where twice per week she would spend time with always the same dogs in the presence of two dog trainers who would make sure that all the dog behaviours are appropriate. At the beginning she was shy, but with every week, she started to open herself more and more and finally she was able to play with all the group, but also individuals. It was what socialisation is for a 12 weeks old puppy. Teaching her appropriate behaviours and gaining self confidence in the group. \
The second stage of the training was the elimination of fear related to the surrounding world. This should be approached very slowly, as too much socialization can only worsen anxiety and cause withdrawal. You should start with socialization with the situations and places the dog will go to most often and which are in the immediate environment of the dog's life. For us, it was walking through the door. For the first few weeks, Mitzi had to come through all kinds of doors, including the front door. When she was next to the door, even when it was closed, her reaction was to freeze. I started training with conditioning. On the street, in the entrance to the staircases, I spread the treats, then my partner walked with Mitzi, who was collecting the treats. First, I spread them a little further from the door, and then closer and closer, so that after some time she had to touch the door with her nose to take the flavour. Of course, for the method to be effective, you should watch the reactions of the dog and make sure that you progress only when the dog feels confident. I did the same with the front door to the house, every time Mitzi was near the door, she was rewarded. With time, I noticed that she was going to the door herself to see if there was a treat there. The next step was going through the door itself. Here again, for each step she took, Mitzi was awarded a prize. Over time, she realized that the door was nothing terrible, and even something good. Another method used for her training was desensitisation. Mitzi was afraid of the traffic and trains, so I have watched with her passing cars from safe distance and moved forward towards the stimuli only when she felt comfortable. Today, we got Mitzi since almost 2 years and she is over her fears. She is very confident dog who loves adventures. She is going with us everywhere, for visits, vacations, forests or city. She is very comfortable with every environment and knows how to behave. However, she does not let other dogs to bully her anymore and she can stand for herself when needed. Being mindful of her previous issues and what consequences can have fear, we are still in training. Still rewarding Mitzi’s great behaviour, watching her closely and making sure that we are always on the correct way. \
Compulsive behaviours called also Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder (OCD), is an emotional condition that involve the dog showing the usual behaviour in an exaggerated and obsessive manner. These behaviours usually make no sense and are hard for the dog carrier to stop them. Most of these behaviours at the first glance are pointless, but in fact they are the dog's response to stressful situations. Such behaviour is a sign that the dog is suffering from anxiety or even depression. Dogs suffering from obsessive-compulsive behaviour may devote up to 80% of their activity to it. Among the most common behaviours are: chasing the tail, licking paws, biting the hair, drinking plenty of water, chasing cars, chasing shadows, eating inedible items, scratching the floor, licking the floor, barking and howling. As mentioned before, for most of the dogs, obsessive-compulsive behaviour is caused by the stress, conflict or frustration. Repeating a given behaviour allows to avoid confrontation with a stressful stimulus and brings relief. For some dogs, this behaviour becomes ritualized and repetitive because of the intense reward that it is associated with: it stimulates the brain to secrete serotonin and endorphins - happiness hormones that can make the dog addicted. \
Repetitive behaviour can also be the result of boredom and the lack of another healthy outlet for the pet's energy. Occasionally, OCD can be a symptom of severe neurological disorders and dementia. \
Over the time, if the behaviour is not addressed, it is going to get worse and the dog is going to react in this way on every potentially stressful situation. The Obsessive-Compulsive disorder may be genetic, meaning some breeds of dogs are more at risk of developing it, or it may be acquired during the puppy period. \
Another dog I would like to write about is suffering from OCD. It is a Bull Terrier, a breed that is genetically at risk for the syndrome, however, in this situation, not only the genetic burden, but also environmental factors and the behaviour of the dog's caregivers had a direct impact on his disease. The caregivers decided to consult a dog behaviorist when the dog was almost a year old and had been exhibiting obsessive behaviour for a long time. During the interview with the owners, I learned that as a puppy only a few weeks old, he had a habit of chasing shadows. Shadow chasing can be the result of anxiety or frustration. Puppies that are not exercised enough (mentally and physically), that are left alone for a long time and not socialised are prone to this behaviour. The puppy that is bored or frustrated sees the shadow as a play item and tries to catch it. Moreover, the dogs have natural instinct of chasing the pray, but since they are never able to catch a shadow, frustration and anxiety are the result. Unfortunately, the caregivers at that moment did not realize that it could be a dangerous emotional illness, their behaviour (the owners treated the situation as a game) encouraged the dog to continue chasing the shadows. In the initial stage, when the puppy starts to show obsessive compulsive behaviour, gently interrupt it and redirect the dog to another activity, it may be playing with a toy or executing a command, e.g., sit down. However, remember that this behaviour is due to other factors and make sure your dog's needs are being met. Telling their dog's story, the caregivers stated that they used a laser to play chasing a point on the floor (such lasers are often used to play with a cat). In my opinion, chasing a point that the dog could never catch, also a point that randomly appeared and disappeared, boosted the dog's behaviour as well. As a result, the nearly one-year-old Bull Terrier chased shadows, whether at home or on an evening walk, and chased reflections of glass or mirrors on sunny days. His caregivers reviled that the dog was able to spend the whole day doing this activity until he got tired enough to just fall asleep. \
We started the therapy by informing the breeder about the problem and asking if other dogs in the kennel had a similar problem. It is very important that the breeder is aware that his puppy may have a genetic problem. Then I asked the caregivers of the dog to eliminate the stimuli that cause his obsessive behaviour from his life as much as possible, e.g. all mirrors that reflect, to obscure glass windows, etc. Of course, not everything can be eliminated, but the smaller number of stimuli makes working with the dog much easier. First of all, the dog was recommended to take long and interesting walks, during which he could sniff, look for treats in the recesses of trees, play with other dogs and do agility in the dog park. These tasks were aimed at consuming the dog's energy, making his life interesting and adventurous. So that the home is calm and quiet. The Tellington TTouch massage, which the dog caregivers signed up for, also helped to calm him down. I recommended that the caregivers teach him some tricks and commands. So as to be able to redirect the dog's attention from glass reflections and shadows to the performance of tasks or just to call him with “to me” command. The dog's therapy lasted a very long time and unfortunately it was not able to fully remove the problem, but thanks to it the syndromes decreased so that the dog could lead a relatively normal life. \
Emotional problems are difficult for both the dog and its owner. It is very important to address them as soon as possible because if left unattended, they will certainly deepen and the rehabilitation process will take longer. Fortunately, with the right, positive approach, the dog's emotional problems can be worked through so that he has a happy life.
