---
title: "Why and how do dogs play"
date: "2022-10-15"
image: "getting-started.jpg"
excerpt: "Why and how do dogs play"
isFeatured: true
---

# Why and how do dogs play?

Over a year ago I brought my second dog home. My first female dog was 1.5 years old at the time and as sometimes happens, as an adopted dog she still had some issues to work through. Of course, I was afraid at the beginning if both female dogs will like each other and if there would be harmony in the house, but I knew I had to do everything to build a strong bond between them. Sometime before I bought my second dog, I started to read a lot about having a pack of dogs and their relationship and I read everywhere about doggy play as an activity that builds this bond. I knew that playing between the girls would be very important but I was afraid for the little puppy because my first dog weighed 25 kg. So, I went to the veterinarian for advice and he told me that I should supervise the dogs' play, but I should not moderate it. In other words, I should trust dogs who know what they are doing and will be able to play with each other despite the large difference in weight.
When Zlata (the puppy) was a few weeks old, she met Baci, a puppy who was born on almost the same day as her. The dogs struck up a thread of understanding and have been best friends ever since. From the day they met to this day, their many meetings have been filled with play. And it was their play that inspired me to write this paper. Some time ago I published a short video of Zlata playing with Baci on one of the dog owners' Facebook groups. The play looks like wrestling, at times it is quite rough, but it is still play. That video caused quite a discussion under the post, where dog owners criticized me for allowing such a game, that it is dangerous, etc. When I wrote that my puppy plays in a similar way even with my first, 25kg dog, all hell broke loose. From that moment on I started to research dog play, I was recording and analysing it, trying to answer the question: what actually dog play is, what its function is and should guardians moderate play of their dogs?
What is canine play?
What is actually dog play? According to Victoria Stilwell “dog-to-dog play is a series of active and repetitive behaviours that have different meanings when performed in other contexts, but helps dogs develop important life skills and experiences that promote good physical and mental health”. This means that dog play should be considered on a case-by-case basis taking into account various factors such as whether the dogs have known each other beforehand, whether the play takes place in a closed or open environment, whether there is the possibility of more dogs participating in the play, as well as the breed and age of the dogs. According to Mechtild Kaufer, we should not put an equal sign between how people play and how dogs play. In the human world, play is the opposite of reality, whereas in the dog world, it is the imitation of the real behaviours such as chasing prey. Play has the function of a survival training, but it also teaches dogs etiquette, or how to behave in a group. This is very important, especially for young dogs in the socialisation period. And this is why, because of the period of socialisation, the moment in the dog's life when he learns behaviour and which will affect his whole life, it is very important that the puppy is exposed to play with other dogs. Marc Bekoff together with Jessica Pierce in their book are pointing out why can we considerate canine play as a safe activity. They are writing, that dogs are able to adapt their strength during play to the capacity of their mate and we call this "self-handicapping". Even dogs of higher rank allow themselves to be "dominated" during play. And most importantly, it has been proven through numerous studies that dogs follow four rules when playing: ask first, be honest, follow the rules, and admit when you are wrong.
This means that play is, above all, voluntary. In order to distinguish whether a behaviour is "serious" or "just" play, dogs have developed ways of communicating their intention to play. This is known as metacommunication and in play consists of so-called play signals, which are usually clear and unambiguous and may occur at the beginning or during play. Different ways of communicating play are described in scientific articles - these can be auditory, visual or olfactory signals. Most of the signals described in the scientific literature are visual signals, for example: "smiling muzzle", "playful approach" described as relaxed and springy, "playful hop" and "bow". Thanks to Marc Bekoff’s research we know that the bow is as an "invitation to play". However, bowing can have also other functions. It is a behaviour that is also observed in the ethogram of hunting, demonstrative or agonistic behaviour. It has been observed that wolves perform a bow to their prey when hunting. The animal faces forward towards the wolf and the wolf performs the bow. Obviously, the wolf does not want to play with his prey. This bow serves to provoke the prey to flee, which allows the wolf to attack from behind and thus avoid the risk of injury caused, for example, by the horns of the defending prey. Given that play is an imitation of, among other things, hunting, this behaviour is intended to establish who in play is the “prey” and who is the chaser. It is also worth mentioning that roles change during play. The chaser becomes the “prey and vice versa, this is to maintain playful mood and there are no winners or losers. It is because the play is not related to the individual position in the social hierarchy.
Solitary play
Mechtild Kaufer in her book about dog play behaviour mentions two types of canine play: solitary and social. Solitary play is mainly based on exploring new objects of the environment, so-called exploratory behaviour. Here it is worth to mention that chews of all kinds do not act like toys in what we understand as solitary play, because chewing or biting do not belong directly to play behaviour, but to comfort behaviour, i.e., behaviour that leads to a relaxed, calmed animal. For a self-playing dog, the best toys are those that imitate prey, i.e., they are fluffy and can make sounds. The dog playing with them will toss, pounce, grab and shake them, that is, imitate hunting. Independent play is very important for your dog's development as it aims to develop exploratory behaviour. That is why it is very important to replace toys from time to time. According to Wojciech Pisula, the author of the book “Psychology of animal exploratory behaviour” new stimuli engage dog’s attention for longer than familiar stimuli. In addition, the more novel (different from previously seen stimuli) and the more complex the stimulus, the higher the animal's curiosity. In summary, to ensure dog's proper development and a high level of interest in playing, toys should be complex, not simple, should contain multiple elements and should be changed frequently to maintain a sense of novelty. My dogs have two types of toys. The everyday toys are always within reach of their muzzle and the so-called special toys, which are hidden away, not for everyday use and only brought out during the play time. In this way, even older toys are still attractive to my dogs and I don't have to buy new ones every now and then. My dog Mitzi is definitely a hunting breed dog mix, she shows a very strong hunting predisposition. On a walk in the woods, she tends to spend her time sniffing, when she senses game, she pulls on the lead and barks. It also happened to her to follow the trail and just run away. Some time ago I noticed that walking in the woods and sniffing out game causes a lot of frustration in Mitzi, which she then takes out on my other dog. I realised that going out into the woods is like hunting for her, unfortunately there is no closure of the hunting behaviour, i.e., capturing the game. So, I bought some toys that look like ferrets and in the woods when Mitzi goes into sniffing mode, I toss the toy to her, then the dog finds it, tosses it, shakes it, bites it and goes on quietly. Solitary play in this case has been used to fulfill Mitzi’s natural instincts.The other type of the solitary play is the locomotor play. In this type of play, the dog basically plays with himself without use of any toys. The dog can roll over on his bed with all paws up, the dog might jump up and down, chase his own tail, play with his ears or display so called “zoom” which is running around the appartment or some object.
Every dog owner, especially the ones who got puppies knows very well situations in which their puppy got crazy for a 5 minutes and runs around without stop. Zooming is all about releasing energy of the puppy. My dog Zlata loves to zoom outside, in the garden. She usually chooses the big tree and runs around it for about a minute. A couple of times I tried to engage with her in the game, but she did not follow me into her play, it seems that the zooming is a very individual game. It is been proven that dogs play locomotor games only when they are in good state of mind, and this good mood translates into the movement. I have noticed that my dogs are usually presenting locomotor play once I play with them myself, for example after playing tug of war, once I clean up the toys, which is the signal that the game was over, Mitzi runs into her bed and she rolls around, then she freezes lying on her back with four paws raised, her muzzle is opened in the so-called dog's smile. She is deffenatley in happy state of mind.
Social play
“Social play is an activity directed toward another individual in which actions from other contexts are used in modified forms and in altered sequences. Some actions also are not performed for the same amount of time during play as they are when animals are not playing.” In other words, social play mimic actions used in other activities such as hunting, mating or even agression. Social play teaches dog etiquette, appropriate behaviour and check dog’s own boundries and boundries of other dogs. During the game, she learns that other dogs can influence her behaviour and vice versa. At puppy age, social play is particularly important, as the puppy learns communication and the rules of the dog group. Play between dogs also has an impact on the dog-human relationship, because it is during social play that the puppy learns that people and dogs play differently. I remember when Zlata was only 8 weeks old and was brought home from a breeder, she treated the household members like other dogs, also her playtime looked like she just threw herself at our legs, just like puppies do doggy wrestling. The same thing happens when a puppy nips its carer in play. Biting, wrestling and other such behaviours are perfectly fine for dog to dog play, but a puppy should learn that play will be different with his carers.
Social play is always preceded by a set of signals intended to invite to the play. This signals are displaying willingness and readiness to play, dogs use signals to avoid conflicts and misunderstanding. Signals of play include touching the other dog with a paw, barking accusingly, imitating running away from the other dog to see if he is chasing and a characteristic bow, that was described in the first chapter. When thinking about doggy play it is very fascinating how dogs actually decide who they want to play with, how and for how long. Watching my two dogs, I am sure that in addition to the signals that we as humans see, there are other individual preferences of a particular dog. For example, Mitzi, who spent the first nine months of her life in a shelter, likes to play with almost all the dogs. However, she only plays one game with them and that is chasing the prey, where she is absolutely always the prey. Her body language is also usually the same, Mitzi comes up to the dog, wags her tail, if the dog also wags its tail, she comes closer, puts her paw on the dog and starts to run away. If the other dog keeps more distance, Mitzi does not approach him, instead she just starts to run away, turning her head to see if she is being chased. Mitzi never makes a bow to another dog, whereas when another dog does, she responds with playfulness.
Contrary to Mitzi, Zlata shows no desire to play with unfamiliar dogs. She starts to play only when Mitzi is playing, which you can see on the attached photos, but she usually ignores the presence of other dogs during the play. If a stranger dog encourages her to play by sending signals, she usually does not take these signals and simply walks away. But when Zlata sees one of her favourite, familiar dogs, she takes up the game right away.

The play of dogs who know each other
When observing groups of dogs in the dog’s park, it is easy to see a whole series of play signals. But, it happens very often that a new dog is released from the leash and, without any warning, simply runs on top of the other dog and both of them just start to play. By this direct behaviour we can recognise that these dogs know each other very well and often play with each other.
In her book, Mechtild Kaufer writes that dogs who play with each other regularly, therefore know each other well and are able to assess their partner's abilities. In other words, the dog simply knows what likes and how far he can go while playing with his friend. This is because both dogs already have a play histrionics, they know what behaviour the partner is displaying, for example when the partner wants to continue the play and when they want to stop it. I also think that a big factor is the trust that the dogs have in each other when they know each other well. I mentioned earlier that Mitzi is always the dog that is chased when playing. Unfortunately, sometimes the dog that is chasing her starts to play too roughly by biting Mitzi's back paws. She doesn't like such rough play and usually stops it. When the game is between a dog that Mitzi knows, she is automatically more relaxed because she knows that she can trust him and that he will not push her too far. I've written before about Mitzi resenting certain types of behaviour towards unfamiliar dogs, e.g. she doesn't play bow, she never runs after the other dog, she is always the dog being chased, she doesn't allow others to to run too close toher. However, when it comes to playing with Zlata, Mitzi's behaviour is completely different, she plays bow, Zlata is the only dog that can chase and run close to Mitzi. Despite the fact that Zlata is much smaller and does not have as much strength as Mitzi, in play they are equal, and even Mitzi lets Zlata win. This is a perfect example of how dogs who know each other, who have a bond with each other, behave differently in play. Zlata runs up to Mitzi and bites her. This is a classic hunting game behaviour and has nothing to do with aggression or attack. But when the game gets too intense some dogs, usually hunting breeds or greyhounds, start biting the other dog for real. Because Mitzi can run very fast and is not eager to change her playing behaviour, i.e. she does not become a chasing dog, it sometimes happened that another dog started to bite her. Therefore, Mitzi usually keeps a good distance from the other dog during this play. However, as you can see in the picture, she allows Zlata to bite, because the dogs know each other very well and trust each other. In the photo you can see that both dogs are relaxed, there is no dispute between them.
Marc Bekoff writes how play between dogs who know each other well is more rough and that familiar dogs don't usually start play with doggy formalities. Of course, the forms of greeting and establishing etiquette in play are intended to eliminate possible conflicts. In the case of dogs that know and like each other, the possibility of conflict is small, so they do not waste time on greetings, but immediately go on to play. Zlata and Mitzi usually play with each other in a rather rough way. However, they never cross the line and when one of them has had enough, the other stops playing. When Zlata and Mitzi first met Baci in the dog run, the dogs initially played together in a very gentle manner. As time went by, the play became more and more fierce and today it is basically wrestling. When the dogs see each other they also have a habit of packing up against Zlata. This means Mitzi and Baci both attack Zlata in play and try to knock her over. What is very interesting that such play never takes place in reverse, i.e. Zlata and Baci against Mitzi. I think it is because Mitzi is the oldest and strongest dog, she knows Zlata best and Baci just participates in this play. Greetings profedures of dogs that know each other is practically non-existent. Every time Zlata and Mitzi see Baci, they immediately start playing. In the first photo, Baci runs into the dog park, Mitzi and Zlata are running on either side of him. Then they immediately start playing and wrestling together.
Self handicapping during the play
One of the most amazing things about dog play is that dogs of all ages and sizes are able to play with each other. When Zlata was brought home, Mitzi was already an adult, large dog weighing 25 kg. Despite this, the dogs started to play with each other from the very first moment. It was amazing to watch how Mitzi adapts her play style to the tiny puppy and how she allows her to behave in certain ways. Little Zlata ran up to Mitzi, pulled her by the ears, slid on her like on a slide, and Mitzi only used her mouth to play so as not to hurt the little one. Another time in the dog park I saw Zlata pulling a stick with a large white dog that must have weighed at least 50 kg. The dog could have taken the stick from Zlata at any time, but for the sake of fun he used less force so that the odds were even. Self-handicapping is a voluntary behavior that requires the dog's ability to judge his playmate's abilities and then make the necessary adjustments to maintain the play session worthy of continuing for both parties. This requires a great level of self-control in the midst of play which can become difficult to gauge when arousal levels get high.
How dog do dogs play among each other?
We have already discussed the types of dog play, i.e. how a dog plays with themself and how he plays in a group, then we focused on the behaviours that lead to play and how dogs who know each other play. In this section I would like to describe the most common types of group play that I have observed in dogs.
Chasing game is typical prey-predator running game in which one dog runs away and another dog (or more dogs) chases him. During such a game, the dogs usually run at reduced speed, the dog that is the "prey" checks how far the chasing dog is and if it he too far away, the "prey" stops and waits for the other dog. This game is also characterised by frequent breaks and role reversal. Most often the roles are reversed after a short break or during play, sometimes the chasing dog suddenly overtakes the "prey" and becomes the "prey" himself. This is definitely Mitzi's favourite game. However, as I wrote before, she does not like to switch roles and therefore she plays best with Zlata or another hunting or herding dog whose nature is to run after the "prey".
Again Zlata runs first, but there is a confrontation. The dogs imitate the fight by biting each other on the muzzles and then Mitzi runs away first. As you can see, the change of roles does not always take place during the break, sometimes it happens during the confrontation and the imitation of a fight.
Another variant of the chasing game is group chasing, i.e. several dogs run after one which is the " prey". I often see such a scenario in dog parks when two dogs are playing chase with each other and suddenly other dogs join the game. Another variation of this game is chasing a dog which has a "prey" in its mouth, e.g. a stick or a toy. This is Zlata's favourite game and very often I observe that she takes a toy in her mouth and runs to Mitzi. She plays bow and runs away trying to provoke Mitzi to chase her. Very often during play the toy loses its importance, i.e. it is simply abandoned somewhere and the dogs continue playing without it. This means that the toy itself is not as important as the chasing process itself.
Group pursuit of Mitzi. She is relaxed, by the position of her paws you can see that she is not running with maximum speed. Perhaps Mitzi is lowering her capabilities because she is being chased by three puppies.
Another group chase, this time Mitzi is chased by a large greyhound and Zlata. This time Mitzi's body posture is tense, ears perked up, you can see she is trying to get as much speed as possible. At one point Zlata gives up running, it is too fast.
Playing fight is one of Mitzi and Zlata's most frequent games at home. The game involves a lot of body contact, lots of growling and biting of ears, neck, legs. As Mechtild Kaufer writes “(…) play fighting has been thought to involve the use of species-specific patterns of agnostic behaviur in a non-serius context. Agnostic behavior includes all behaviors that are exhibited in connection with conflicts- offense, defense and escape.” The function of play that imitates real conflict is to develop and improve owns abilities, to reduce the fear of conflict situations in real life and to exchange information about partner's techniques and abilities. These games have nothing to do with establishing hierarchy in a herd or dominance behaviour. Fight play usually looks like wrestling, with two dogs biting each other's legs, falling over each other or biting each other's neck and ears. Zlata and Baci very often play wrestling, most often it is the end of a game of chasing. It is interesting to observe the change of roles during wrestling, sometimes Zlata is the one on the bottom and Baci is the one who "attacks" her, and sometimes the other way round. If the biting is too strong the dogs inform each other by making a squeaky sound. During the fighting game, dogs can assume different positions, they can lie on their side or stand on their hind legs, which is called high wrestling. Mitzi and Zlata usually assume a relaxed, lying position, very often they make growling sounds and they bite each others paws, ears and neck and also they play with his mouth open, it's called mouthing or jaw sparring. This soft biting allows dogs to practice fighting without causing harm to each other. Dogs usually play in this way when they are relaxed, or when one of them is lying on the bed, the other comes and starts playing. The play usually does not go beyond the bed.
As a guardian of two dogs and a passionate of dogs psychology, I very often find myself in groups of dogs, whether in dog parks, simply on walks or yet other situations. Watching dogs at play is absolutely fascinating: the individual preferences of each dog, his communication before, during and after play, and the fact that all dogs play and they play all their lives is incredibly appealing. It is also interesting to note that dogs usually play with each other in a similar way. Through my observations at the dog park and with my own dogs, I am able to make a list of the most popular dog play styles. In my opinion this means that the way dogs play must be encoded in their brains, i.e. that dogs are born knowing how they will play, first with their siblings and then with other, often completely unfamiliar dogs. It is also very interesting to note the influence of early puppy socialisation on the way in which a particular dog later on plays with other dogs. In the dog park, it is very easy to recognise which dogs unfortunately have not had good socialisation and that is why they push other dogs too hard, use their teeth, or start a real fight during play. In my thesis I have tried to show that the way dogs play is on the one hand very diverse, but on the other hand there are certain boundaries and play etiquette. I believe that dogs should not be restricted in their ability to play because it develops their senses and helps to satisfy primitive desires such as the urge to hunt. The play of two well socialised dogs even of different age or weight is possible and not dangerius.
